---
layout: post
title:  "Unit 4: Algebraic Solution"
date:   2023-06-24 00:00:00 +0000
categories: lecture notes
katex: True
---

What does it mean for a variable to equal to something? The following details some rules about what it means to equal something in math:  

## Equivalence Relation

1. Reflexitivity: For any number $$a$$, $$a = a$$. This one is rather trivial.
2. Symmetry: Suppose that $$a = b$$ for some numbers $$a, b$$. Then, $$b = a$$ too.
3. Transitivity: Suppose that $$a = b$$ and $$b = c$$ for some numbers $$a,b,c$$. Then, it is also the case that $$a = c$$. 

With this in mind, let us assess how one goes about solving for an appropriate value $$x$$ such that the algebraic equality remains a true statement.

## SADMEP (???)

In an algebraic expression, after we are told what the value of the variable is, we proceed with the computation by following the order of operations, colloquially known by the acronym PEMDAS. Thus, in order to reverse-engineer what the value of the $$x$$ should be, we intuitively should follow the order of operations **backwards**. As an illustration, consider the following:  

Suppose that we are interested in finding the $$x$$ values such that the following equality holds for some numbers $$a,b,c,d$$:  

$$ax+b = cx + d$$  

Suppose that we are given a value for $$x$$, say $$x = 2$$. We then substitute $$2$$ for $$x$$ and proceed the computation by following the order of operations, so we would multiply 2 by $$a$$ or $$c$$, then add $$b$$ or $$d$$ depending on what side of the equation you are referring to. At the end of the day, we end up with the equation $$2a + b = 2c + d$$, which is not very useful for us unless we know more about the numbers $$a,b,c,d$$. 

Instead, Let us begin by combining the like terms. Here, we just have a term with a variable $$x$$ and a constant for each side. Without the loss of generality, let's put all variables to the left hand side of the equality side. Due to the symmetry property above, the side does not really matter as long as we are consistent with the designation. Pay a special attention to the order of operations being applied in solving for $$x$$.

1. **Subtract** $$b$$ and $$cx$$ from both sides: $$ax - cx = d - b$$
2. By distributive property, we have that $$(a-c)x = d - b$$
3. **Divide** by $$a-c$$, provided that $$a \not = c$$ (why?): $$x = \frac{d - b}{a - c}$$, where $$a \not = c$$.  

Try to see what happened for yourself - "plugging in" and "solving" are inverse operations, if you think about it. This idea will be more formalized when we start discussing functions and its inverses.

## Negative Exponents and Multiplicative Inverses

We will introduce another notation to describe the reciprocals, also known as the multiplicative inverses. Let us illustrate how the negative exponents work with this example:  

* Notice that 2^3 = 8. Let's divide by 2.
* Then, We obtain 2^2 = 4, and let's repeat the process until we reach exponent 0.
* 2^1 = 2, and divide once more to obtain **2^0 = 1**. Can we continue in this fashion? Notice that we are dividing by 2 and the exponents are decreasing by one.
* Now, let's consider $$2^{-1} = \frac{1}{2}$$. Do you see how the negative exponent here refers to the reciprocal?  

In this fashion, we see that for all natural number $$k$$, $$2^{-k} = \frac{1}{2^k} = (\frac{1}{2})^k$$. Also, did the choice of 2 make have impact in our argument? I suggest that this argument works for any nonzero base.

## Exponent Rules

Here are some rules about exponentiation. I will be explaining why these statements are true in class.

* $$(ab)^n = a^n b^n$$  
* $$a^n a^m = a^{n+m}$$    
* $$(a^n)^m = a^{nm}$$