---
layout: post
title:  "Unit 7: Patterns"
date:   2023-06-28 00:00:00 +0000
categories: lecture notes
katex: True
---

## Arithmetic and Geometric Progression

Let us go back to the world of natural numbers real quick. Let us recall that this means we are only talking about the nonnegative integers, meaning whole numbers from 0 and onward.

Besides the usual 0, 1, 2, 3, and onward, there are more "patterns" (mathematically known as __sequences__) that one could generate, using addition and multiplication respectively.

For an example, let us generate a sequence of integers from 1 by repeatedly adding and multiplying 2. 

* Sequence generated by adding 2 to 1: 1, 3, 5, 7, ... (the positive odd integers)
* Sequence generated by multipying 2 to 1: 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, ... (the powers of 2)

The first type is what we refer to as an _arithmetic progression_, a sequence obtained by repeated adddition, and _geometric progression_, a sequence obtained by repeated multiplication. 

## Linearity

Notice that for the sequence of odd integers, the difference is __constant__, and the ratio (next term divided by the current term) is constant for a geometric progression. We say that a sequence is __linear__ when we are referring to an arithmetic progression. So, how does this apply to us when we are referring to all real numbers and not only the natural numbers? 

## Polynomials & Nonlinearity

Polynomials are of the expression: $$\displaystyle c_0 + c_1x + c_2x^2 + \ldots + c_nx^n = \sum_{i = 0}^{n} c_ix^i$$. The big E looking symbol is called "Sigma", a Greek letter that is analogous to S in the latin alphabets. Hopefully you can see that this Sigma notation simply refers to repeated addition where each constant and the exponent is determined by the __index__, i. 

For our class, we say that a function is linear if $i \leq 1$. Otherwise, we have a nonlinear polynomial expression, a quadratic polynomial as the smallest such example. 