---
layout: post
title:  "Unit 8: Functions"
date:   2023-07-03 00:00:00 +0000
categories: lecture notes
katex: True
---

## Not just any function, but a mathematical one.

In mathematics, there is a notion of __well-defined__ vs. __undefined__ (or ill-defined). It is implied that the functions we speak of are __well-defined__ functions in mathematics, and here is what that entails:

* function: a designation of a number $$x$$ to $$y$$, where the set of numbers where $$x$$ originates from is referred to as the __domain__ and the __range__ (formally, codomain) for $$y$$. Here, $$x$$ is colloquially referred to as the **input** and $$y$$ as the **output**. In order for a function to be well defined, we say that an input is designated to one and only one output, if it has a designation.

Just like how we had __conditions__ for our mathematical definition of fractions, we have a similar restriction on the notion of functions. Formally, we say that: for all inputs $$x_1$$ and $$x_2$$, if $$x_1 = x_2$$, then $$f(x_1) = f(x_2)$$, where $$f(x_i) = y_i$$ for $$i = 1, 2$$. (Notice that f(x) and y refer to the same value, just a different notation). 

In other words, if we have to choose an output for an input, we say that it is an ill-defined function. As an example, think of a parabola sideways: $$x = y^2$$. You will easily see that for any $$x$$ value greater than 0, there exist 2 possible output values for $$x$$. For an example, if $$x = 4$$, then $$y = 2$$ or $$y = -2$$. Once again, just one output per input is the requirement here. An output may have different input values, but per input, there must be exactly upto one output. 

Thus, this idea is the formalization of what we refer to as the __vertical line test__. 

## Bijection and Inverse functions

We say that the function $$f$$ is a collection (or a set) of points $$(x, f(x))$$. We then say that the **inverse** of $$f$$, noted $$f^{-1}$$, is the collection of $$(f(x), x)$$, meaning the x and the y coordinates are swapped. Graphically. This corresponds to __flipping__ the graph of $$f$$ across the diagonal line, $$y = x$$. Notationwise, we need to be **extra careful** here, as -1 we see here is the reference to function inverse, not the multiplicative inverse!!! As an example, we see that the inverse function of $$y = x$$ is simply $$y = x$$, not $$x^{-1} = \frac{1}{x}$$.

Let us examine what type of functions there are, in a broad sense. 

* one-to-one function: for all outputs, there exists only one input. Graphical illustration of this idea is referred to as the __horizontal line test__.
* onto function: We say that a function is __onto__ if the range of the function is the entire number line (vertically, so from negative infinity to positive infinity). Formally, we say that a function is onto if the set of the outputs equals the codomain of the function (once again, codomain is just a fancy term for "range", which unfortunately has other meanings in different mathematical contexts, such as statistics...)

A function that is both one-to-one and onto is called a __bijection__, and believe it or not, **bijection is the requirement** for a function to have an __inverse function__! Why? If time allows, I will explain the intuition. 